.TH "ssh_filter_btrbk" "1" "2017-07-30" "btrbk v0.25.1" ""
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.SH NAME
ssh_filter_btrbk.sh \- ssh command filter script for btrbk
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBssh_filter_btrbk.sh\fR [\-s|\-\-source] [\-t|\-\-target] [\-d|\-\-delete] [\-i|\-\-info]
    [\-p|\-\-restrict\-path <path>] [\-l|\-\-log] [\-\-sudo]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBssh_filter_btrbk.sh\fR restricts SSH commands to \fIbtrfs\fR
commands used by \fIbtrbk\fR. It examines the SSH_ORIGINAL_COMMAND
environment variable (set by sshd) and executes it only if it matches
commands used by \fIbtrbk\fR. The accepted commands are specified by
the "\-\-source", "\-\-target", "\-\-delete" and "\-\-info" options.
.PP
Note that the following btrfs commands are always allowed: "btrfs
subvolume show", "btrfs subvolume list".
.PP
Note that commands for stream compression (pipes through gzip, pigz,
bzip2, pbzip2, xz, lzo, lz4) as well as rate limiting (pipes through
"pv -L") are always allowed.
.PP
Example line in /root/.ssh/authorized_keys on a backup target host:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
command="ssh_filter_btrbk.sh \-\-target \-\-delete \-\-restrict\-path /mnt/btr_backup" ssh\-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1...hwumXFRQBL btrbk@mydomain.com
.fi
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.PP
\-s, \-\-source
.RS 4
Allow commands for backup source: "btrfs subvolume snapshot", "btrfs
send". Equivalent to "\-\-snapshot \-\-send".
.RE
.PP
\-t, \-\-target
.RS 4
Allow commands for backup target: "btrfs receive", "realpath" and "cat
/proc/self/mounts".
.RE
.PP
\-d, \-\-delete
.RS 4
Allow commands for subvolume deletion: "btrfs subvolume delete". This
is used for backup source if \fIsnapshot_preserve_daily\fR is not set
to \[lq]all\[rq], and for backup targets if
\fItarget_preserve_daily\fR is not set to \[lq]all\[rq].
.RE
.PP
\-c, \-\-compress
.RS 4
Allow commands for stream compression (pipes through gzip, pigz,
bzip2, pbzip2, xz, lzo, lz4). Needed if \fIstream_compress\fR is set.
.RE
.PP
\-i, \-\-info
.RS 4
Allow informative commands: "btrfs subvolume find\-new", "btrfs
filesystem usage". This is used by btrbk \fIinfo\fR and \fIdiff\fR
commands.
.RE
.PP
\-\-snapshot
.RS 4
Allow btrfs snapshot command: "btrfs subvolume snapshot".
.RE
.PP
\-\-send
.RS 4
Allow btrfs send command: "btrfs send".
.RE
.PP
\-\-receive
.RS 4
Allow btrfs receive command: "btrfs receive".
.RE
.PP
\-p, \-\-restrict\-path <path>
.RS 4
Restrict btrfs commands to <path>.
.RE
.PP
\-l, \-\-log
.RS 4
Log ACCEPT and REJECT messages to the system log.
.RE
.PP
\-\-sudo
.RS 4
Allow btrfs commands to be called via sudo. Enable this if you have
"backend btrfs-progs-sudo" in your btrbk configuration file.
.RE
.SH AVAILABILITY
Please refer to the btrbk project page \fBhttp://digint.ch/btrbk/\fR
for further details.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR btrbk (1),
.BR btrbk.conf (5),
.BR btrfs (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Axel Burri <axel@tty0.ch>
